one summer afternoon in 2013
DC police detained questions and
searched a man who appeared suspicious
and potentially dangerous this wasn't
what I was wearing today of the
detention to be fair but I'm a picture
of that as well I know it's very
frightening try to remain calm at this
time at this time I was interning at the
public defender service in Washington DC
and I was visiting a police station for
work I was on my way out and before I
could make it to my car two police cars
pulled up to block my exit and an
officer approached me from behind he
told me to stop take my backpack off and
put my hands on the police car parked
next to us about a dozen officers then
gathered near us all of them had handgun
somehow two salt rifles they rifled
through my backpack
they patted me down they took pictures
of me spread on the police car and they
laughed and as all this was happening as
I was on the police car trying to ignore
the shaking in my legs trying to think
clearly about what I should do something
stuck out to me is odd when I look at
myself in this photo if I were to
describe myself I think I'd say
something like 19 year old Indian male
bright t-shirt wearing glasses but they
weren't including any of these details
into their police radios as they
describe me they kept saying Middle
Eastern male with a backpack Middle
Eastern male with a backpack and this
description carried on into their police
reports I never expected to be described
on my own government in these terms
lurking nefarious terrorists and the
detention dragged on like this they sent
dogs trained to smell explosives to
sweep the area I'd been in they call the
federal government to see if I was on
any watch list
they sent a couple of detectives to
cross-examine me on why if I claimed I
had nothing to hide
I wouldn't consent to a search of my car
and I could see they weren't happy with
me but I thought I had no way of knowing
what they'd want to do next at one point
the officer who patted me down
and the side of the police station to
see where the security camera was to see
how much of this was being recorded and
when he did that they really sink in how
completely I was at their mercy I think
we're all normalized from a young age to
the idea of police officers and arrests
and handcuffs so it's easy to forget how
demeaning and coarse of a thing it is to
seize control over another person's body
and I know it sounds like the point of
my story is how badly treated I was
because of my race and yes I don't think
I would have been detained if I were
white but actually what I have in mind
today is something else what I have in
mind is how much worse things might have
been if I weren't affluent I mean they
thought I might be trying to plant and
explosives and they investigated that
possibility for an hour and a half but I
was never put in handcuffs
I was never taken to a jail cell I think
if our from one of Washington DC's poor
communities of color and they thought I
was endangering officers lives things
might have ended differently and in fact
in our system I think it's better to be
an affluent person suspected of trying
to blow up a police station than it is
to be a poor person who's suspected of
much much less than this and I want to
give you an example from my current work
right now I'm working at a civil rights
organization in DC called equal justice
under law let me start by asking you all
question how many of you have ever
gotten a parking ticket in your life
raise your hand yeah so if I and when I
had to pay it it felt annoying and it
felt bad but I paid it and I moved on
I'm guessing most of you have paid your
tickets as well but what would happen if
you couldn't afford the amount on the
ticket and your family doesn't have the
money either what happens then well one
thing that's not supposed to happen
under the law is you're not supposed to
be arrested in jails simply because you
can't afford to pay that's illegal under
federal law but that's what local
governments across the country are doing
to people who are poor and so many of
our lawsuits that equal justice under
law target these modern-day debtors
prisons one of our cases is against
Ferguson Missouri and I know when I say
Ferguson many of you will think of
police violence but today I want to talk
about a different aspect of the
relationship between their police force
and their citizens
Furguson was issuing an average of over
to arrest warrants per person per year
mostly for unpaid debt to the courts
when I imagine what that would feel like
if every time I left my house there was
a chance the police officer would run my
license plate
see a warrant for unpaid debt seized my
body the way they did in DC and then
take me to a jail cell I feel a little
sick and I've met many of the people in
Ferguson who have experienced this and
I've heard some of their stories in
Ferguson's jail in each small cell
there's a bunk bed and a toilet but
they'd pack four people into each cells
there'd be two people on the bunks and
two people on the floor one was nowhere
to go except right next to the filthy
toilet which was never cleaned and in
fact the whole cell was never cleaned so
the floor and the walls were lined with
blood and mucus no water to drink except
coming out of a spigot connected to the
toilet the water looked and tasted dirty
there was never enough food never any
showers women menstruating without any
hygiene products no medical attention
whatsoever when I asked a woman about
medical attention she laughed and she
said oh no the only attention you get
from the guards in there is sexual so
they take the debtors to displaced and
they'd say we're not letting you leave
until you make a payment on your debt
and if you could if you could call a
family member who could somehow come up
with some money then maybe you were out
so it was enough money you were out but
if it wasn't then you'd stay there for
days or weeks and every day the guards
would come down to the cells and haggle
with the debtors about the price of
release that day and you'd stay until at
some point the jail will be booked to
capacity and they'd want to book someone
new and at that point they'd think okay
it's unlikely this person can come up
with the money it's more likely this new
person will you're out there in and the
Machine kept moving like that I met a
man who nine years ago was arrested for
panhandling in a Walgreens he couldn't
afford his fines and his court fees from
that case when he was young he survived
at a house fire only because he jumped
out the third storey window to escape
but that's all left him a damage to his
brain in several parts of his body
including his leg so he can't work
and relies on Social Security payments
to survive when I met him in his
apartment he had nothing of value there
not even food in his fridge he's
chronically hungry he had nothing of
value in his apartment except a small
piece of cardboard on which he'd written
the names of his children he cherished
this a lot he was happy to show it to me
but he can't pay his fines and fees
because he has nothing to give but in
the last nine years he's been arrested
13 times and jailed for a total of a
hundred and thirty days on that
panhandling case one of those stretches
lasted 45 days so just imagine spending
from right now until sometime in June in
the place that I described to you a few
moments ago he told me about all the
suicide attempts he's seen in Ferguson's
jail about the time a man found a way to
hang himself out of reach of the other
inmates
so all they could do was yell and yell
and yell trying to get the guards
attention they still they could come
down and cut him down
and he told me that it took the guards
over five minutes to respond and when
they came the man was unconscious so
they called the paramedics and the
paramedics went to the cell they said
he'll be ok so they just left him there
on the floor I heard many stories like
this they shouldn't have surprised me
because suicide is the single leading
cause of death in our local jails this
is related to the lack of mental health
care in our jails I met a woman single
mother of three making seven dollars an
hour she relies on food stamps to feed
herself and the children and about a
decade ago she got a couple of traffic
tickets and a minor staff charge and she
can't afford her fines and fees on those
cases and since then she's been jailed
about ten times on those cases where she
has schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
and she needs medication every day she
doesn't have access those medications in
Ferguson's jail because no one has
access to their medications so she told
me about what it was like to spend two
weeks in a cage hallucinating people and
shadows and hearing voices begging for
the medication that would make it all
stop only to be ignored and this isn't
anomalous either 30% of woman in our
local jails have serious mental health
needs just like hers but only one in six
receive any mental health care while in
jail and so I heard all these stories of
this grotesque dungeon that Ferguson was
operating for its debtors and when it
came time for me to actually see it and
to go visit Ferguson's jail I'm not sure
what I was expecting to see but I wasn't
expecting this it's an ordinary
government building it could be a post
office or a school and it reminded me
that these illegal extortion schemes
aren't being run somewhere in the
shadows they're being run out in the
open by our public officials they're a
matter of public policy and this
reminded me that poverty jailing in
general even outside the debtors prison
context but is a very visible and
central role in our justice system what
they have in mind is our policy of bail
in our system whether you're detained or
free pending trial is not a matter of
how dangerous you are or how much of a
flight risk you pose it's a matter of
whether you can afford to post your bail
amount and so bill cosby whose bail was
set at a million dollars immediately
writes the check and doesn't spend a
second in the jail cell the Sandra bland
who died in jail was only there because
her family was unable to come up with
$500 and in fact there are half a
million Sandra Bland's across the
country five hundred thousand people who
are in jail right now only because they
can't afford their bail amount we're
told that our jails are places for
criminals but statistically that's not
the case three out of every five people
in jail right now are their pretrial
they haven't been convicted of any crime
they haven't pled guilty to any offense
right here in San Francisco eighty-five
percent of the inmates in our Jail in 15
Cisco are pretrial detainees this means
San Francisco is spending something like
80 million dollars every year to fund
pretrial detention and many of these
people who are in jail only because they
can't post bail are facing allegations
so minor that the amount of time it
would take for them to sit waiting for
trial is longer than the sentence
they'd receive if convicted which means
they're guaranteed to get out faster if
they just plead guilty and so now the
choices should I stay here in this
horrible place away from my family my
dependents almost guaranteed to lose my
job and then fight the charges or should
I just plead guilty to whatever the
prosecutor wants and get out and I just
point their pretrial detainees not
criminals but once they take that plea
we'll call them criminals even though an
affluent person would never have been in
this situation the inoculum person would
have simply been bailed out so at this
point you might be wondering disguise in
the inspiration section would be doing
this it is extremely depressing I want
my money back but in actuality I find
the talking about jailing much less
depressing than the alternative because
I think if we don't talk about these
issues and collectively change how we
think about jailing at the end of all of
our lives we'll still have jails full of
poor people who don't belong there that
really is depressing to me but what's
exciting to me is the thought that these
stories can move us to think about
jailing in different terms not in
sterile policy terms like mass
incarceration or sentencing of
nonviolent offenders but in human terms
when we put a human being in a cage
we're days or weeks or months or even
years what are we doing to that person's
mind and body under what conditions are
we really willing to do that and so if
starting with a few hundred of us in
this room we can commit to thinking
about jailing in this different light
and we can undo that normalization I was
referring to earlier so if I leave you
with anything today I hope it's with the
thought that if we want anything to
fundamentally change not just to reform
our policies on bail and find these
seeds but also to make sure that
whatever new policies replace those
don't punish the poor and the
marginalized in their own new way if we
want that kind of change then this shift
in thinking is required of each of us
thank you
[Applause]